GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK
Jorge Luis Borges

The incident took place in the Los Álamos ranch, in the Junín district, to the south, in the last days of March 1928. Its protagonist was a medical student, Baltasar Espinosa. We can define him for now as one of many Buenos Aires boys, with no other noteworthy features than that oratorical faculty that had made him deserve more than one award at the English school of Ramos Mejía and an almost unlimited kindness. He didn't like to argue; he preferred that the interlocutor was right and not him. Although the hazards of the game interested him, he was a poor player, because he disliked winning. His open intelligence was lazy; At the age of thirty-three, he still had one course left to graduate, the one that attracted him the most. His father, who was a free thinker, like all the gentlemen of his time, had instructed him in the doctrine of Herbert Spencer, but his mother, before a trip to Montevideo, asked him to pray the Our Father every night and make the sign of the cross. Over the years he had never broken that promise. He was not without courage; one morning he had exchanged, with more indifference than anger, two or three fistfights with a group of classmates who wanted to force him to participate in a university strike. He abounded, out of a spirit of acquiescence, in questionable opinions or habits: the country mattered less to him than the risk that in other parts they would believe that we use feathers; he revered France but despised the French; he didn't think much of Americans, but he approved of the fact that there were skyscrapers in Buenos Aires; he believed that the gauchos of the plains are better horsemen than those of the blades or the hills. When Daniel, his cousin, suggested spending the summer in Los Alamos, he immediately said yes, not because he liked the countryside but out of natural complacency and because he didn't look for valid reasons to say no.

The main part of the estancia was large and somewhat abandoned; the quarters of the foreman, whose name was Gutre, were very close. The Gutres were three: the father, the son, who was singularly crude, and a girl of uncertain paternity. They were tall, strong, bony, with reddish hair and Indian faces. They hardly spoke. The foreman's wife had died years ago.

Espinosa, in the field, was learning things that he did not know and that he did not suspect. For example, that one should not gallop when one is approaching the houses and that no one goes out on horseback except to fulfill a task. In time he would come to distinguish the birds by their cry.

A few days later, Daniel had to go to the capital to close an animal operation. At most, the business would take a week. Espinosa, who was already a bit fed up with his cousin's bonne fortunes and his indefatigable interest in tailoring variations, preferred to stay in the room with his textbooks. The heat was pressing and not even the night brought relief. At dawn, thunder woke him up. The wind shook the casuarinas. Espinosa heard the first drops and thanked God. Cold air came rushing in. That afternoon, the Salado overflowed.

The next day, Baltasar Espinosa, looking at the flooded fields from the gallery, thought that the metaphor that equates the pampas with the sea was not, at least that morning, completely false, although Hudson had written that the sea seems more big, because we see it from the deck of the boat and not from the horse or from our height. The rain did not stop; the Gutres, helped or bothered by the villager, saved a good part of the hacienda, although there were many drowned animals. There were four ways to get to the ranch: the waters covered all of them. On the third day, a leak threatened the foreman's house; Espinosa gave them a room in the back, next to the tool shed. The move brought them closer; they ate together in the great dining room. Dialogue was difficult; the Gutres, who knew so many things about the countryside, did not know how to explain them. One night, Espinosa asked them if the people had any memories of the raids, when the headquarters was in Junín. They told him yes, but they would have answered the same thing to a question about the execution of Carlos Primero. Espinosa recalled that his father used to say that almost all cases of longevity that occur in the countryside are cases of poor memory or a vague concept of dates. The gauchos tend to ignore the year in which they were born and the name of the person who fathered them.

In the whole house there were no other books than a series of the magazine La Chacra, a veterinary manual, a deluxe copy of the Tabaré, a History of the Shorthorn in Argentina, a few erotic or police stories and a recent novel: Don Segundo Shade. Espinosa, in order to somehow distract from the inevitable after-dinner conversation, read a couple of chapters to the Gutres, who were illiterate. Unfortunately, the foreman had been a herdsman and couldn't care less about someone else's adventures. He said that this work was light, that they always carried a freighter with everything that is needed and that, if he had not been a herdsman, he would never have reached the Laguna de Gómez, the Bragado and the fields of the Núñez, in Chacabuco. . In the kitchen there was a guitar; the peons, before the events that he narrated, sat in a circle; someone tempered it and never managed to touch it. This was called a guitar.

Espinosa, who had let his beard grow, used to linger before the mirror to look at his changed face and smiled at the thought that in Buenos Aires he would bore the boys with the story of the Salado flood. Curiously, he missed places he never went and would never go: a corner of Cabrera street where there is a mailbox, some masonry lions on a gate on Jujuy street, a few blocks from El Once, a warehouse with a tile that didn't quite know where it was. As for his brothers and his father, they would already know from Daniel that he was isolated - the word, etymologically, was fair - because of the flood.

Exploring the house, always surrounded by water, he found an English Bible. In the final pages the Guthries - such was his real name - had written his story. They were natives of Inverness, had come to this continent, no doubt as laborers, in the early nineteenth century, and had interbred with Indians. The chronicle ceased towards one thousand eight hundred and seventy something; they no longer knew how to write. Within a few generations they had forgotten English; the Castilian, when Espinosa met them, gave them work. They lacked faith, but in their blood remained, like dark traces, the harsh fanaticism of the Calvinist and the superstitions of the pampas. Espinosa told them about his find and they hardly listened.

He flipped through the volume and his fingers opened it to the beginning of the Gospel according to Mark. To exercise in the translation and perhaps to see if they understood something, he decided to read that text to them after lunch. He was surprised that they listened to him carefully and then with quiet interest. Perhaps the presence of the gold letters on the cover gave it more authority. It's in their blood, he thought. It also occurred to him that men, throughout time, have always repeated two stories: that of a lost ship searching the Mediterranean seas for a beloved island, and that of a god who has himself crucified on Golgotha. He remembered the elocution classes at Ramos Mejía and stood up to preach the parables.

The Gutres dispatched the roast meat and sardines so as not to delay the Gospel.

A little lamb that the girl pampered and adorned with a light blue ribbon was injured by a barbed wire fence. To stop her bleeding, they wanted to put a spider web on her; Espinosa cured her with some pills. The gratitude that this healing aroused did not cease to amaze him. At first, he had distrusted the Gutres and had hidden in one of his books the two hundred and forty pesos that he had with him; now, with the boss absent, he had taken his place and was giving timid orders, which were immediately followed. The Gutres followed him through the rooms and down the corridor, as if they were lost. As he read, he noticed the crumbs he had left on the table being brushed away. One afternoon he surprised them talking about him with respect and few words. Finished the Gospel according to Mark, he wanted to read another of the three that were missing; the father asked him to repeat what he had already read, so that he could understand it better. Espinosa felt that they were like children, who like repetition more than variation or novelty. One night he dreamed of the Flood, which is not surprising; the hammering of the construction of the ark woke him up and he thought that perhaps it was thunder. Indeed, the rain, which had abated, intensified again. The cold was intense. They told him that the storm had broken the roof of the tool shed and that they were going to show him when the beams were fixed. He was no longer an outsider and everyone treated him with attention and almost pampered him. None of them liked coffee, but there was always a little cup for him, which they filled with sugar.

The storm occurred on a Tuesday. On Thursday night he was reminded by a soft tap on the door that, just in case, he always locked. He got up and opened it: it was the girl. In the dark he didn't see her, but from her steps he noticed that she was barefoot and later, in her bed, that she had come from the bottom, naked. He didn't hug him, he didn't say a single word; she lay next to him and was trembling. It was the first time he had met a man. When he left, he didn't kiss her; Espinosa thought that he didn't even know her name. Urged by an intimate reason that he did not try to find out, he swore that in Buenos Aires he would not tell anyone that story.

The next day began like the previous ones, except that the father spoke with Espinosa and asked him if Christ allowed himself to be killed to save all men. Espinosa, who was a free thinker but was forced to justify what he had read to them, replied:

-Yes. To save everyone from hell.

Gutre then told him:

-What is hell?

-A place underground where the souls will burn and burn.

"And were those who drove the nails into him also saved?"

"Yes," replied Espinosa, whose theology was uncertain.

He had been afraid that the foreman would hold him accountable for what happened last night with his daughter. After lunch, they asked him to reread the last few chapters. Espinosa slept a long nap, a light sleep interrupted by persistent hammers and vague premonitions. Towards evening he got up and went out into the corridor. He said as if he were thinking out loud:

-The waters are low. Almost there.

"Not long now," repeated Gutrel, like an echo.

The three of them had followed him. Kneeling on the stone floor, they asked for his blessing. Then they cursed him, spit on him and pushed him to the bottom. The girl was crying. Espinosa understood what awaited him on the other side of the door. When he opened it, he saw the firmament. A bird cried out; he thought: it is a goldfinch. The shed was roofless; they had ripped out the beams to build the Cross.

FINISH